
The Conley index is an important topological tool in the study of dynamical systems. Conley’s monograph is the standard reference on this subject; see also  for more recent expositions. In symplectic geometry, the Conley index was notably used to prove the Arnol’d conjecture for the n-dimensional torus. Furthermore, it inspired the development of Floer homology, which is an infinite dimensional variant of Morse theory. Apart from symplectic geometry, Floer homology appears in the context of gauge theory, where it produces three-manifold invariants starting from either the instanton (Yang-Mills) or the monopole (Seiberg-Witten) equations.
In , the author used the Conley index more directly to define a version of (S1- equivariant) Seiberg-Witten Floer homology. The strategy was to approximate the Seiberg-Witten equations by a gradient flow in finite dimensions, and then take the homology of the appropriate Conley index. This is very similar in spirit to the work of Ge‘ba, Izydorek and Pruszko, who defined a Conley index for flows on Hilbert spaces using finite dimensional approximation. However, the Seiberg-Witten case is more difficult analytically, because there is no monopole map from a single Hilbert space to itself; rather, the monopole map takes a Sobolev space to one of lower regularity.
Compared to the more traditional constructions of monopole Floer homology , the method in  has the following advantages:
• It avoids dealing with transversality issues, such as finding generic perturbations: To take the Conley index, one does not have to ensure that the gradient flow is Morse-Smale;
• It makes it easy to incorporate symmetries of the equations: the S1-symmetry in, the Pin(2)-symmetry used in , as well as finite group symmetries coming from coverings of three-manifolds;
• It yields more than just Floer homologies: The equivariant stable homotopy type of the Conley index is a three-manifold invariant. One can then apply to it other generalized homology functors, such as equivariant K-theory.
In contrast to the Kronheimer-Mrowka construction of monopole Floer homology (which works for all three-manifolds), one limitation of the Conley index approach is that so far it has only been developed for manifolds with b1 = 0, and partially for manifolds with b1 = 1 . The main difficulty is that one needs to find suitable finite dimensional approximations. This is easy to do for rational homology spheres, when the configuration space is a Hilbert space—the approximations are given by finite dimensional subspaces. However, it becomes harder for higher b1, due to the presence of an algebraictopologic obstruction called the polarization class; we refer to for more details.
This article is meant as an introduction to the finite dimensional approximation / Conley index technique in Seiberg-Witten Floer theory. We discuss several consequences, and in particular highlight the following application of Pin(2)-equivariant Seiberg-Witten Floer homology:
Theorem 1.1. There exist non-triangulable n-dimensional topological manifolds for every n ≥ 5.
Previously, non-triangulable manifolds have been shown to exist in dimension four by Casson. The proof of Theorem 1.1 rests on previous work of Galewski-Stern and Matumoto, who reduced the problem to a question about homology cobordism in three dimensions. That question can then be answered using Floer theory.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we give an overview of Conley index theory, focusing on gradient flows and the relation to Morse theory. In Section 3 we describe the construction of the Seiberg-Witten Floer stable homotopy type for rational homology threespheres. In Section 4 we present the historical background to the triangulation problem, and sketch its solution. Finally, in Section 5 we discuss other topological applications.

Morse complexes. Let M be a closed Riemannian manifold. Given a Morse-Smale function f : M → R, there is an associated Morse complex C∗(M,f). The generators are the critical points of f and the differential is given by
(1) ∂x = 􏰄nxyy, y
where nxy is the signed count of index 1 gradient flow lines between x and y. The Morse homology H∗(M,f) is isomorphic to the usual singular homology of M.
Let us investigate what happens if we drop the compactness assumption. In general, it may no longer be the case that ∂2 = 0:
Example 2.1. Suppose we have a Morse-Smale function f on a surface, a gradient flow line from a local maximum x to a saddle point y, and another flow line from y to a local minimum z. Let M be a small open neighborhood of the union of these two flow lines. Then the restriction of f to M does not yield a Morse chain complex: we have ∂2x = ±∂y = ±z.

In order to obtain a Morse complex on a non-compact manifold M, we need to impose an additional condition. Let f : M → R be Morse-Smale. Some gradient flow lines of f connect critical points, while others may escape to the ends of the manifold, in positive and/or in negative time (and either in finite or in infinite time). Let us denote by S ⊆ M the subset of all points that lie on flow lines connecting critical points. (In particular, S includes all the critical points.) In Example 2.1, the set S is not compact. This is related to the nonvanishing of ∂2: The moduli space of flow lines from x to z is a one-dimensional manifold M ∼= (0, 1), and the broken flow line through y only gives a partial compactification of M (by a single point).
Therefore, let us assume that S is compact. Then, the same proof as in the case when M is compact shows that the differential ∂ given by (1) satisfies ∂2 = 0. We obtain a Morse complex C∗(M,f). The next question is, what does the Morse homology H∗(M,f) compute in this case? As the reader can check in simple examples, it does not give the singular homology of either M or S. The answer turns out to be the homology of the Conley index of S, which we now proceed to define.
